Add `unsafe` expressions (#10196)
dotnet/csharplang: proposals/unsafe-evolution.md

### Syntax

This proposal introduces:

- a new `safe` contextual keyword that can be applied to [`extern` members](#extern) and [fields in explicit layout](#fields),
- and `unsafe` expressions (`unsafe(expression)`), detailed in [unsafe expressions](#unsafe-expressions).

> This new keyword is available under new LangVersion, but regardless of [opt-in](#metadata), under the premise that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New syntax is available under new LangVersion, but regardless of [opt-in](#metadata), under the premise that
```

We do not need to add support to Visual Basic for *requires-unsafe* members since there are no `unsafe` contexts in VB today and no way to work with pointers there either.

### `unsafe` expressions

> An `unsafe` expression introduces a minimal `unsafe` context for evaluating a single expression. It is useful in situations where an `unsafe` block would unnecessarily widen the `unsafe` scope, or where `unsafe` blocks cannot be used syntactically (such as in `catch` filters, field initializers, constructor initializers, and the operand position of `await`).

Reviewer 2: For reference, there are number of threads that discuss similar ideas in Rust, e.g.:
- https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/issues/3431
- https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/pre-rfc-single-function-call-unsafe/22343
- https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/ability-to-call-unsafe-functions-without-curly-brackets/19635/4

The idea has not found enough support.

EDIT: The idea is to have unsafe expression without a block.

Reviewer 3: I think the nuance there though is that rust allows `var x = unsafe { Foo(); }`, which would be something entirely new to C# (allowing a block to itself be an expression and an implicit result returned from it).

C# handles this via `keyword(...)` in other cases, so it's the natural extension in C# as well.

Rust's proposal is then also about allowing `unsafe expr`, where-as this proposal is about requiring it to be `unsafe(expr)` which still has an explicit scoping given.

Reviewer 4: Yep. Tanner hit the nail on the head here: the `unsafe(expr)` in C# is as close to equivalent to the Rust code as we have today. We'd need to add something like https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/issues/9243 if we wanted the exact rust version.

#### Syntax

An `unsafe_expression` is added as a *primary_no_array_creation_expression*:

```antlr
unsafe_expression
    : 'unsafe' '(' expression ')'
    ;
```

It is subject to the same `AllowUnsafeBlocks` requirement as the `unsafe` keyword elsewhere.

#### Semantics

An `unsafe_expression` establishes an `unsafe` context for evaluating its *expression*. The type and value of the `unsafe_expression` are the type and value of the enclosed *expression*, and the expression is evaluated as if it occurred inside an `unsafe` block. Pointer dereferences, function pointer invocations, and calls to *requires-unsafe* members are all permitted within the enclosed expression.

The `unsafe` context established by an `unsafe_expression` does not extend beyond its closing parenthesis.

#### Motivation and migration examples

Several syntactic positions do not admit `unsafe` blocks at all, yet may contain subexpressions that call *requires-unsafe* members. Without `unsafe` expressions, migrating such code requires extracting the unsafe sub-expression into a helper local function or a temporary variable, which obscures intent and increases verbosity.

> **`await` on a *requires-unsafe* method.** An `await` expression cannot appear inside an `unsafe` block. When the method being awaited becomes *requires-unsafe*, a temporary variable is required to hold the task before it can be awaited:

Reviewer 2: Why do these limitations exist? Do they still make sense in the new unsafe model?

Reviewer 4: Presumably, the old `unsafe` dealing with pointers wanted to enforce that users didn't try to access pointers across an `await`. We could possibly look at changing that.

Reviewer: There is already an open question for that, see section "More unsafe contexts and relaxations".

> Presumably, the old `unsafe` dealing with pointers wanted to enforce that users didn't try to access pointers across an `await`

Yes but why? They are already in `unsafe` context. Perhaps it has something to do with the state machine codegen shape not being guaranteed by the language. But it's `unsafe` so no guarantees are given anyway.

Reviewer 4: I'm going to resolve this question. I don't think it's related to the proposal; we can discuss allowing `await`s inside an `unsafe` block separately.

Reviewer 2: The first motivating example for this proposal will be invalid assuming these limitations get lifted.

I have suggested an edit.

```cs
// Without unsafe expressions: must spill to a local function
static bool FilterHelper(Exception e)
{
    unsafe { return NowUnsafeCall(e); }
}

try
{
    await DoWork(); // 'await' here prevents wrapping the whole try/catch in 'unsafe'
}
catch (Exception e) when (FilterHelper(e))
{
}

// With unsafe expressions: inline and minimal scope
try
{
    await DoWork();
}
catch (Exception e) when (unsafe(NowUnsafeCall(e)))
{
}
```

**Field initializers.** Under the updated rules, `unsafe` on a field does not introduce an `unsafe` context in its initializer. When a field's initializer calls a *requires-unsafe* member, an `unsafe` expression provides the context without requiring a helper method:

```cs
// Without unsafe expressions: must spill to a helper method
static int InitialValue()
{
    unsafe { return ReadFromPointer(); }
}
static int _value = InitialValue();

// With unsafe expressions: inline
static int _value = unsafe(ReadFromPointer());
```

> **Constructor initializers.** `this(...)` and `base(...)` initializer argument lists are expressions, not statement bodies. If one of those arguments calls a *requires-unsafe* member, there is again no place to insert an `unsafe` block, so the call must otherwise be moved to a helper:

Reviewer 2: This pain point is not specific to `unsafe`. It shows up regularly when you need to run some non-trivial code (e.g. non-trivial argument validation) before calling the base constructor.

Reviewer 4: Sure. But the issue we're looking at here is specifically moving existing code to the new model, and potential issues we've seen when doing so.

```cs
class C(int x)
{
    C() : this(unsafe(GetUnsafeValue()))
    {
    }
}

class Derived : Base
{
    Derived() : base(unsafe(GetUnsafeValue()))
    {
    }
}
```

**Inline calls.** More generally, wrapping only the *requires-unsafe* sub-expression keeps the audit scope tight and avoids pulling surrounding safe code (such as argument evaluation or a containing method call) into the `unsafe` context:

```cs
extern int Add(int i1, int i2); // Some fancy extern addition function

// Code I want to write:

> Console.WriteLine(unsafe(Add(1, 2)));

Reviewer 2: Can we show the examples with the SAFETY comment - it is the code we actually want to write.

Reviewer 4: a218f9d

We do not need to add support to Visual Basic for *requires-unsafe* members since there are no `unsafe` contexts in VB today and no way to work with pointers there either.

### `unsafe` expressions

An `unsafe` expression introduces a minimal `unsafe` context for evaluating a single expression. It is useful in situations where an `unsafe` block would unnecessarily widen the `unsafe` scope, or where `unsafe` blocks cannot be used syntactically (such as in `catch` filters, field initializers, constructor initializers, and the operand position of `await`).

> #### Syntax

Reviewer: There is a higher-level Syntax section near the top of the speclet. Consider linking the unsafe expression from there. Or maybe better, turn that other one into "safe keyword" section since that's what it currently only talks about.

Reviewer 4: @copilot address this and https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/pull/10196#discussion_r3297646633.

An `unsafe_expression` is added as a *primary_no_array_creation_expression*:

```antlr
unsafe_expression
    : 'unsafe' '(' expression ')'
    ;
```

It is subject to the same `AllowUnsafeBlocks` requirement as the `unsafe` keyword elsewhere.

#### Semantics

> An `unsafe_expression` establishes an `unsafe` context for evaluating its *expression*. The type and value of the `unsafe_expression` are the type and value of the enclosed *expression*, and the expression is evaluated as if it occurred inside an `unsafe` block. Pointer dereferences, function pointer invocations, and calls to *requires-unsafe* members are all permitted within the enclosed expression.

Reviewer: > the expression is evaluated as if it occurred inside an `unsafe` block

This might be misleading (is the expression inside an inner block? so `out var`s are not visible outside?). I think this part of the sentence can be simply removed (we are already saying before that the expression introduces an `unsafe` context which is all that matters I think).

> Pointer dereferences, function pointer invocations, and calls to *requires-unsafe* members are all permitted within the enclosed expression.

Similarly this is just a clarification, not wording of the rule, right?

```suggestion
An `unsafe_expression` establishes an `unsafe` context for evaluating its *expression*. This means that pointer dereferences, function pointer invocations, and calls to *requires-unsafe* members are all permitted within the enclosed expression. The type and value of the `unsafe_expression` are the type and value of the enclosed *expression*.
```

#### Semantics

An `unsafe_expression` establishes an `unsafe` context for evaluating its *expression*. This means that pointer dereferences, function pointer invocations, and calls to *requires-unsafe* members are all permitted within the enclosed expression. The type and value of the `unsafe_expression` are the type and value of the enclosed *expression*.

The `unsafe` context established by an `unsafe_expression` does not extend beyond its closing parenthesis.

#### Motivation and migration examples

Several syntactic positions do not admit `unsafe` blocks at all, yet may contain subexpressions that call *requires-unsafe* members. Without `unsafe` expressions, migrating such code requires extracting the unsafe sub-expression into a helper local function or a temporary variable, which obscures intent and increases verbosity.

**`await` on a *requires-unsafe* method.** An `await` expression cannot appear inside an `unsafe` block. When the method being awaited becomes *requires-unsafe*, a temporary variable is required to hold the task before it can be awaited:

```cs
// Without unsafe expressions: must spill to a temporary
Task t;

> unsafe { t = DoWork(); }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// SAFETY: Discharges obligations because reasons
unsafe { t = DoWork(); }
```

await t;

// With unsafe expressions: the unsafe context wraps only the call;
// the await remains outside it and is fully legal
// SAFETY: Discharges obligations because reasons
await unsafe(DoWork());
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[More unsafe contexts and relaxations](#more-unsafe-contexts-and-relaxations) is an alternative way to address this case.
```
Also, I would more this to be towards the end of motivating examples. I think it is one of the less convincing motivating examples.

Reviewer 4: > I think it is one of the less convincing motivating examples.

I disagree. This is the example that motivated me to go open this and bring the topic to LDM actively.

Reviewer 2: The current unsafe restrictions around await and unsafe are nonsensical in the new model. I would even call it a bug. I do not expect it is going be a difficult decision to lift them. We should discuss them first.

}
catch (Exception e) when (NowUnsafeCall(e))
{
}

// With unsafe expressions: inline and minimal scope
try
{
    await DoWork();
}
// SAFETY: Discharges obligations because reasons
catch (Exception e) when (unsafe(NowUnsafeCall(e)))
{
}
```

**Field initializers.** Under the updated rules, `unsafe` on a field does not introduce an `unsafe` context in its initializer. When a field's initializer calls a *requires-unsafe* member, an `unsafe` expression provides the context without requiring a helper method:

```cs
// Without unsafe expressions: must spill to a helper method
static int InitialValue()
{
    // SAFETY: Discharges obligations because reasons
    unsafe { return ReadFromPointer(); }
}
static int _value = InitialValue();

// With unsafe expressions: inline
// SAFETY: Discharges obligations because reasons
static int _value = unsafe(ReadFromPointer());
```

**Constructor initializers.** `this(...)` and `base(...)` initializer argument lists are expressions, not statement bodies. If one of those arguments calls a *requires-unsafe* member, there is again no place to insert an `unsafe` block, so the call must otherwise be moved to a helper:

```cs
class C(int x)
{

>     C() : this(unsafe(GetUnsafeValue()))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // SAFETY: Discharges obligations because reasons
    C() : this(unsafe(GetUnsafeValue()))
```

    {
    }
}

class Derived : Base
{

>     Derived() : base(unsafe(GetUnsafeValue()))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // SAFETY: Discharges obligations because reasons
    Derived() : base(unsafe(GetUnsafeValue()))
```

    {
    }
}
```

**Inline calls.** More generally, wrapping only the *requires-unsafe* sub-expression keeps the audit scope tight and avoids pulling surrounding safe code (such as argument evaluation or a containing method call) into the `unsafe` context:

```cs

> extern int Add(int i1, int i2); // Some fancy extern addition function

Reviewer 2: The correct way to write an extern with this signature is most likely going to be `extern safe int Add(int i1, int i2)` and callers do not need `unsafe` context at all.

This can use a more realistic example

Should we require it for the `safe` keyword too?
Should we require it for both `unsafe` blocks and `unsafe` member declarations or other combination of those?

### (answered) `unsafe` expressions

> Other languages with more comprehensive `unsafe` features have added `unsafe` as an expression, to enable improved user ergonomics and allow authors to more precisely limit where `unsafe` is used. Is this

Reviewer 2: Rust has concept of block expressions, so unsafe block expressions fall out naturally. I do not think Rust added the unsafe expressions explicitly.

Reviewer 4: I mean, yes, but I would still consider that as an "unsafe expression". It does compose a little nicer, but C# isn't an expression-oriented language like Rust is.

Reviewer 2: The current wording makes it sound like Rust did an extra work to allow "unsafe expressions". I do not think that's accurate. I have left suggested edit.

Should we require it for the `safe` keyword too?
Should we require it for both `unsafe` blocks and `unsafe` member declarations or other combination of those?

### (answered) `unsafe` expressions

> Other languages with more comprehensive `unsafe` features have added `unsafe` as an expression, to enable improved user ergonomics and allow authors to more precisely limit where `unsafe` is used. Is this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other languages with more comprehensive `unsafe` features have `unsafe` as an expression that
improves user ergonomics and allows authors to more precisely limit where `unsafe` is used. Is this
```

Console.WriteLine(result);
```

> Answer: yes. See the [detailed design section](#unsafe-expressions).

Reviewer: Shouldn't open questions only be marked answered after discussed in LDM?

Reviewer 4: I marked it like this so we can review the diff in LDM. If we end up deciding no, we can change the answer and reject the PR entirely.
